PX Connect Cheat Sheet

How to Use PX Connect

STARTING THE DAY

Step 1
Power the tablet on and make sure it is connected to Wi-Fi.

Step 2
Enter your username, password, and PIN.

Step 3
Select the three-lines icon in the upper right corner.
Then select Settings.

Step 4
Select the name of the provider(s) who are seeing patients at your location that day as soon as you log in.
This ensures their patients appear on the tablet when they check in.

FRONT DESK / TECHS – CAPTURE PATIENT SIGNATURES ON TABLET

Step 5
The patient is marked as "Checked In" or "Arrived" in your Practice Management (PM) system.
This alerts the tablet to start the submission process.

Step 6
At checkout, select the patient's name.

Step 7
Select the appropriate form(s) for the visit.
You may need to scroll to locate the correct form.

Step 8
Open the form.
Approximately 90% of fields will be pre-populated from your PM system.

Step 9
If the patient is receiving Eylea and is uninsured, it is required to collect the patient's income and household size.

Step 10
Obtain the patient's signature.

Step 11
Press the "Save" button.

Step 12
Note on the encounter form or trip ticket that a Benefits Investigation (BI) for the specific drug is needed so the PSR can double check for a signature during checkout.

HELPFUL TIPS AND FAQs

What do the icons on the tablet mean?

Icon meanings:

• The form has been viewed but no other action has been taken on the enrollment form.

• The patient’s signature has been obtained but the enrollment form has NOT been submitted yet.

• The enrollment form was successfully saved.

How do I create an enrollment for a patient who is not on the schedule?

Patients who have an appointment and are checked in will appear on the main tablet screen.

Click the paper icon to create an enrollment and collect a signature for a patient who is not on the schedule.

Note: When you click the paper icon, it will say "Create a new patient."
Selecting this option creates a new ENROLLMENT, not a new patient record.

What drugs can I submit enrollments for on PX Connect?

All commonly used drugs are available on the platform except Ozurdex.

PX Technology is working on adding Ozurdex to the platform in the future.
